---
title: An Analysis of Rules for Rulers
---

**This is an essay I wrote for my multimodal composition class. Enjoy:**

In this report I will analyze Rules for Rulers by CGP Grey, an influential video essay which aims to explain how political power is acquired, maintained, and lost. I will start by providing context around the release of Rules for Rulers, and its creator CGP Grey. Then I’ll dissect how multimodality shaped its delivery to the intended audience, in comparison to the texts that it’s based on. Later, I’ll explain how the theory that Rules for Rulers presents—selectorate theory—is more materialistic than the mainstream perspective. After that, I’ll put selectorate theory in conversation with the theories of marxist scholar Louis Althusser. Finally, I’ll argue that the concept of ideology fits nicely into the framework of selectorate theory.

Rules for Rulers was published on October 24, 2016, just around 17 days before Donald Trump was elected president. An increasing number of voters were questioning why politics seems so convoluted and disappointing. Rules for Rulers attempted to answer this, which helped it amass millions of views. It cleverly addresses its opening question: “Why don't rulers see as clearly as you, instead acting in such selfish, self-destructive, short-sighted ways? Are they stupid?” (Grey 0:15-0:23).

The creator of Rules for Rulers, CGP Grey, is an Irish-American teacher and YouTuber, with degrees in sociology and physics. Grey’s wide variety of informational videos take different stances without seeming to follow a specific ideology. He supports keeping snow-days, reforming the electoral system, developing life-extension, quarantining, and being skeptical toward automation. Many of his videos critique strange loopholes and bureaucratic systems in the US government. In general he has a well-established reputation for making thoughtful and thoroughly-researched educational videos.

Rules for Rulers is based on the book The Dictator's Handbook: Why Bad Behavior is Almost Always Good Politics, written by political scientists Alastair Smith and Bruce Bueno de Mesquita in 2012. While CGP Grey’s video doesn’t actually propose any new political theories, it does popularize them to the over 18 million people who watched it. Widening the audience by presenting academic content in a simplified way is arguably just as important as coming up with these theories in the first place. In fact, transferring knowledge is what the entire profession of teaching is about.

Rules for Rulers is a highly multimodal text because it effectively utilizes the visual, aural, linguistic, and spatial modes of communication. This multimodality was a large factor in helping it become so popular on YouTube.

In its visual mode, cute stick-figure people act out little scenarios, which greatly helps to articulate the main points. Funny visual metaphors convey feelings in a matter of seconds, where a verbal explanation might take much longer. For example, during the introduction, a throne wobbling on a pyramid of cards signals that leaders aren’t as omnipotent as they seem (Grey 0:29-0:33). Real-world footage is omitted, likely to avoid stirring up controversy over actual political events. Things are kept simple and direct, displayed as a series of static slides which directly compliment the narration.

Aurally, Grey’s funny, confident, and conversational speech gives a sense of honesty and credibility. The lack of sound effects and loud background music helps keep the focus centered on the narration. However, a quick segment of glum music does play during the intro and outro. This music is powerful in subconsciously setting the scene and adding depth to the presentation.

Linguistically, the script is simple and to-the-point which makes it easy to follow. Grey interspersed twelve different rhetorical questions throughout the text. These enhance the conversational tone, while simultaneously encouraging viewers to imagine themselves in the shoes of a ruler. The script reads a bit like a long poem, due to its rhythmic combination of long and short lines. And the content is so distilled that almost each line could stand as an insightful quote on its own. 

In the spatial mode, there’s an empty white background and clear layout, which makes the message coherent and ordered. Typography is used sparingly because the layout of stick figures and markings makes everything fairly self-explanatory. In fact, reading a picture book of these slides without the narration, would still likely make a lot of sense.

Unlike Rules for Rulers, The Dictator’s Handbook is a book. Spatially, this allows it to fit more content, which it uses to analyze warfare, foreign aid, and transitions between dictatorships and democracies. It devotes a separate chapter to each of these different topics. Linguistically, its arguments are more fleshed out and backed up with examples. However, the tone is less poetic and more informational, which makes it less entertaining than the video. Gesturally, the book references historical events, statistics, and anecdotes, which helps the message be placed in a real-world context. These multimodal choices make it clear that The Dictator’s Handbook was written for an audience with a deeper interest in politics, ready to devote more time toward building a well-rounded understanding.

The Dictator’s Handbook was actually based on a much longer academic text, also by Alastair Smith and Bruce Bueno de Mesquita, called The Logic of Political Survival. It utilizes game theory and mathematics to analyze the choices of political figures through a logical perspective. Its unique approach helped it accumulate over 6,000 citations within the academic community. However, outside of this setting, its complexity and multimodal choices place it beyond the interest of the general public.

The theory that these works use to make sense of reality is called “selectorate theory”, a framework which differs significantly from the mainstream ideological perspective of politics. Ideology is the lens through which we spontaneously interpret the world. It’s the subconscious mental framework that lets us make sense of the reality around us. The mainstream ideological perspective of politics is that the beliefs and values of governments and political figures influence policy. It explains political changes through the struggle between the doctrines and ideologies of competing groups.

On the other hand, selectorate theory tends to ignore the function of ideology in politics. Instead, it attributes the behavior of governments to purely logical decisions that individuals make to benefit themselves. On the spectrum of political interpretations, selectorate theory is one of the most materialistic. This means that it claims that abstract concepts like ideas, beliefs, and philosophies have little effect on the solid reality of politics.

Instead, selectorate theory posits that presidents, kings, and leaders can only come to power by pleasing certain keys. A dictator’s keys—the military and police—must be bribed to stay in control. Anytime a ruler doesn’t spend all their money on bribes, and instead kindly gives some to non-keys, the keys get dissatisfied. And dissatisfied keys will replace the ruler with someone who’ll give them greater rewards. In this way, the system is self-sustaining.

Although selectorate theory explains reality through a unique lens, it does have parallels to other philosophies. For example, the marxist “bourgeoisie” can be compared to keys whereas the “proletariat” can be compared to non-keys. Marxist scholar Louis Althusser’s text, Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses, also shares similarities with selectorate theory. Althusser defines State Apparatus as the system through which the social status-quo maintains itself. This is analogous to the self-sustaining structure of keys to power.

According to selectorate theory, the keys will stage a revolution whenever a new ruler promises them greater rewards. The new ruler diverts more resources towards keys, which leaves the non-key population with a lower quality of life. This lines up with Althusser’s theory, where he explains, “We know that the State Apparatus may survive, as is proved by bourgeois ‘revolutions’ in nineteenth-century France …, without the State Apparatus being affected or modified: it may survive political events which affect the possession of State power” (12). Though a new government is formed, the structure of keys often remains the same after these coups.

Selectorate theory concludes that true democracies have a high quality of life because a large chunk of their population are keys, in the form of voters. Voters must be “bribed” by being provided public goods like water, roads, freedoms, and emergency services. Dissatisfied voters will elect a leader that promises to better please them.

This view explains why leaders in democracies try to decrease the amount of voters. Having fewer keys to please makes it easier to stay in power. Several countries accomplish this by restricting immigration, making voting more difficult, banning mail-in voting, enacting poll tests and imposing poll taxes. For example, in 2021 the state of Georgia enacted The Election Integrity Act which bans giving food and water to voters in long lines. Thankfully, giving people the freedom to become keys is much easier than taking these freedoms away, for a variety of reasons. That’s why democracies rarely morph into autocracies, but historically the opposite has happened in Taiwan, South Korea, Poland, etc.

Rules for Rulers identifies that voters aren’t the only keys; a candidate must also please sponsors to get money, the media to gain attention, lobbyists to get support, and other politicians to get favors. Unfortunately, the interests of these keys don’t align with those of the general population. And yet, they must be pleased with legislative loopholes, tax credits, contracts, and corrupt regulations. The most successful democracies are those where these actions are transparently presented to other keys, enabling them to react by finding a better leader.

While, Rules for Rulers doesn't claim ideology plays a role in politics, I believe ideology actually fits nicely into selectorate theory. In democracies, public goods such as social services are used to please keys. However, I would argue that voters can also be pleased with ideological goods. For instance, some voters are pleased when the military is expanded, not because it directly affects them, but because it morally reflects their inner beliefs. This gives leaders the opportunity to stay in power by catering to and manipulating these inner beliefs.

According to Althusser, the beliefs of the population are shaped by Ideological State Apparatuses, or ISA. Althusser summarizes ISA as, “a certain number of realities which present themselves to the immediate observer in the form of distinct and specialized institutions” (14). Examples of ISA include newspapers, schools, workplaces, and communities. Through the use of propaganda and publicity campaigns, leaders can shift the ideologies propagated by ISA.

For example, in the 1950s, the US government broadcast nuclear safety campaigns such as Duck and Cover. While this did teach safety skills, it also scared voters, making it easier for leaders to please them by promising to protect them. Today, pleasing the public media is key to gaining power because it’s such an influential ISA. The tug-of-war of different leaders grasping to influence the media, has contributed to rising political polarization between voters.
	In conclusion, Rules for Rulers, through its clever use of multimodality, introduced millions of people to an alternative way of viewing politics—selectorate theory. Although it’s more materialistic than other theories, many similarities between them do exist. I believe that the concept of ideology integrates nicely into the framework of selectorate theory. Rules for Rulers and the texts it's based on, contributed a new perspective on politics, and continues to influence the field today.

## Works Cited

- Althusser, Louis. Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses (Notes towards an Investigation). 1971.

- Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, et al. The Logic of Political Survival. Cambridge, Massachusetts, The Mit Press, 2003.

- Bueno, Bruce. DICTATOR’S HANDBOOK : Why Bad Behavior Is Almost Always Good Politics. S.L., Public Affairs, 2022.

- Grey, CGP. “The Rules for Rulers.” YouTube, 24 Oct. 2016, <www.youtube.com/watch?v=rStL7niR7gs>.
